The formation and maturation of blood cellular components, known as hematopoiesis, in human as well as mouse has been studied extensively over several decades of research, resulting in a highly detailed model of the process. In light of an ever increasing amount of hematopoietic high-throughput sequencing data it is surprising that databases dedicated to host associated experimental data (e.g. BloodExpress and EpoDB) focus on microarray expression data while databases dedicated to host generic experimental data (e.g. NCBI GEO) do not provide methodologies to compare different experimental datasets on the fly. The reliance of existing hematopoietic repositories on microarray expression data requires a new database framework that incorporates existing expression data and enriches them with next-generation sequencing data (e.g. RNA-Seq or Methylation-Seq).

The Blood+ data boutique presented here, offers the user access to not only array-based hematopoietic data but also high-throughput hematopoietic sequencing data and the methodologies required to analyze them. The database organizes the data in accordance with the cell differentiation process and the various cell surface markers that allow the unique identification of specific cell types (e.g. hematopoietic stem cells) or paths in the differentiation process (e.g. erythropoiesis). The data are annotated with the type of experiment used to generate them and the associated publication. Each cell type or path in the differentiation process can be intersected or combined with others to generate gene and peak lists that can be mined for functional or regulatory information.

The current version of the Blood+ is restricted to hematopoiesis in Mus musculus and contains microarray expression data made available through the BloodExpress database as well as high-throughput sequencing data for methylation, expression, histone modification and transcription factor binding behavior.

A common application of expression data during the analysis process of methylation data is the correlation of methylation signals with expressed or suppressed genes. Blood+ can be used to support such queries and existing results of such queries, published in the literature e.g. Hogart et al., can be used to establish the data and functional validity of the repository.